这就是LEGO®的售后服务
=====================

date

:   2012-07-11 11:10:04

slug

:   lego-service

tags

:   lego

category

:   lego

author

:   Dormouse Young

第一次联系（2012年7月11日 星期三）
----------------------------------

不得不说，LEGO®的售后服务比国内的大多数公司都强多了。
我的8088套件中缺少贴纸，于是在LEGO®官网发了一个请求，数分钟后就收到回应，内容见附件1。

比起我买的大金®空调来，光是响应的速度就不只差了一个数量级。我一直相信，服务才是一个公司的根本。没有好的服务，再好的产品都不会有好的前途。而一个好的服务是从一个快速而周到的响应开始的。

第二次联系（2012年7月13日 星期五）
----------------------------------

两天后，客服人员发电子邮件与我联系，要求提供付款凭据（一串数字）。
邮件内容见附件2。

第三次联系（2012年7月16日 星期一）
----------------------------------

我买了两套8088，拆了其中一套，发现没有贴纸，我担心没拆的另一套也没有贴纸，于是我问客服能不能给我补两套。客服答复我：因为是有版权的东西，如果不提供付款凭据，只能给我补发一套。补发的贴纸已经从丹麦的仓库发出，将于21个工作日内送达。
邮件内容见附件3。

收到国外寄来的贴纸(2012年7月27日 星期五）
-----------------------------------------

上图为证，不过由于外语不好，没看出来是哪里寄过来的。

![legostickers.jpg](images/legostickers.jpg)

对于这样的售后服务我还能说什么呢？不知道国内有几个企业会认真地寄一张纸给用户？也不知道有几个企业会用硬板纸来保护一张纸？
不怕不识货，就怕货比货啊。

附件1
-----

Dear LEGO® friend,

（亲爱的乐高朋友）

Thank you for emailing LEGO Consumer Services. We are sorry to hear that
your new LEGO set was incomplete. Our production checks are rigorous. We
even weigh the boxes electronically before they're shipped to check that
there's nothing missing. However, from time to time one or two pieces
can be missing from a set, and of course we're happy to replace them
immediately.

（感谢你给乐高客服写信。我们为你新买的乐高套件不完整而感到抱歉。我们的产品检验是严格的。为了确保套件完整，在发货前我们甚至使用电子秤给产品秤重。但是间或套件会缺少个把零件。我们愿意立即为你补上。）

Unless we need to contact you regarding your part, we'll send a
replacement to you as quickly as possible. This should arrive within
three weeks.

（除非我们需要与你确认缺失的零件，我们将尽快为你送出零件。零件将于三周内送达。）

附件2
-----

Dear XXX,

Thanks for getting in touch with us.

I'm sorry that the stickers are missing from your new LEGO® set. I know
how frustrating it is to not be able to continue building. We try really
hard to make sure all LEGO toys are perfect, but sometimes a faulty one
sneaks through.

The stickers you requested are from a licensed set and because of the
LEGO Group’s agreement with the licensing company, we will need proof of
purchase information before we can send them to you. You can find the
proof of purchase number at the bottom of the back cover of your
building instruction booklet near the LEGO copyright information. It
begins with the number 4 or 6.

Please reply to this email or call one of our experts directly at 00800
5346 5555 with your reference number, 031297034B.

Your order details will be stored in our database for the duration of 4
weeks. After this period of time, the details of your order will be
deleted. Please ensure that you contact us before the end of that period
so that you can place your order with us.

As soon as we have the proof of purchase number, we will send you the
missing stickers as fast as we can!

Also, I'm passing your comments onto the team in charge of product
quality and testing, so that we can investigate.

Please get in touch again if you need anything else (you'll need to
remind me of the reference number on this letter).

Happy building!

Katherine LEGO Direct Consumer Services

If you wish to reply to this message, use the "Reply" button on your
e-mail program. Please do not make any changes to the subject line, as
this may lead to a long delay in responding to you. Please note that we
cannot accept any email attachments at this time.

Does this answer meet your expectations of our service? - Click here to
answer 4 questions. <http://www.econsumeraffairs.com/ls>..............

附件3
-----

Dear XXX,

Thanks for getting in touch with us.

I'm sorry your new LEGO® set didn't have all of its pieces.

We try really hard to make sure all LEGO toys are perfect, but sometimes
a faulty one sneaks through.

Actually - controlling the quality of the toys that leave our factory is
a big job (about seven LEGO sets are sold every second!) and we spend a
long time trying to get it right.

We have a whole department of experts (and machines) who test every LEGO
set before it leaves us - they even weigh every box to make sure there's
nothing missing.

We'd like to get even better at catching any faulty LEGO sets though, so
I'm passing your comments onto the team in charge of testing. It'll help
them make sure this doesn't happen again.

Your LEGO parts are on their way from our warehouse in Denmark and
should be there within 21 business days. Unfortunately, due to the
stickers being a licensed item, I am only able to send you 1 set.

Please get in touch again if you need anything else (you'll need to
remind me of the reference number on this letter).

Happy building!

Sincerely,

Meredith

LEGO Direct Consumer Services

Did You Know?

In 2002 LEGO Group made around 120 million mini figures!

LEGO System A/S, Aastvej 1, 7190 Billund, Denmark - Registry Court:
Retten i Kolding, Domhusgade 24, 6000 Kolding, Denmark - Commercial
Register Number: CVR 47458714 - General Managers: Mads Nipper

（全文完）
